# Distributed Transactions

## Build Instructions:

1. You must first have the Rust compiler (rustc) and Cargo installed. You can either run `curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh` to install these or visit https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install for more installation options. Follow the instructions for the default installation of Rust when prompted.
2. If you are installing Rust for the first time, you will also need to run the following command to add `cargo` to your path for the current shell/session: `source "$HOME/.cargo/env"`
3. Run `make` in the project root directory. This will build 2 executables `./server` and `./client`.

## Running Instructions:

1. To start up a server, run `./server [node id] [path to config]`. Our system requires that `[node id]` be a single character (as described in the documentation). The system will repeatedly attempt to connect all nodes within 60 seconds. If the nodes do not join within that time, the server executable will exit.  
2. To start a client, run `./client [client id] [path to config]`. Our system DOES NOT use the `[client id]` field but it is kept in place to comply with the requirements. Thus, the `[client id]` field does not need to be unique across different transactions. The client will generate error message logs when it encounters TCP connection errors or when it receives invalid input. To prevent these errors from printing to the terminal, run the client executable as follows: `./client [client id] [path to config] 2> /dev/null`. 

## Design: 
Our system uses timestamped ordering to enforce an optimistic concurrency control. The system maintains a set of read timestamps and a set of tentative writes and their timestamps for each account on a server. The system then partitions the accounts by the first letter (i.e. an account starting with `A` will be stored on server `A`). Our system also uses 2-phased commit to ensure consistency across all servers (more on this below). Our system generates timestamps using the timestamp at the instant the client begins a transaction and connects to a coordinator. Timestamp ties across servers are broken by the node id of the server (coordinator). Local timestamp ties from multiple transactions coordinated by the same server are broken by simply keeping track of the last timestamp generated at that server and setting the newly generated timestamp to the last timestamp plus 1 if the newly generated timestamp is less than or equal to the last timestamp generated. 

### Data Structures
Our implementation uses locks to allow the system to process concurrent client requests on a server. However, the server will never encounter a deadlock since it enforces timestamped ordering rules (i.e. older transactions will never wait on newer transactions). Each object maintains an ordered set of read timestamps, an ordered map of tentative writes (ordered by timestamp), the timestamp of the last commit to the object, and the value of the object itself. We use the ordered set and map so we can easily check if some transaction must wait for an older transaction to commit or abort before committing. 

### Representing Deposits and Withdrawals
Our system represents te `DEPOSIT` and `WITHDRAW` operations as a read followed by a write. The system will attempt to read the current balance of some account. If that account exists and there are other tentative writes that have not yet been committed, then the system will wait until the transactions associated with those tentative writes are resolved (either committed or aborted) so that the write we are attempting will not use any partial or stale balance data. Once the older transactions with tentative writes are resolved, the system will perform the read, add/subtract the amount requested, and perform a tentative write for the requesting transaction. If the account exists and there are no other tentative writes, the initial read will immediately return a value and the tentative write will proceed as usual. If that account does not exist, then the system checks if that the request is a `DEPOSIT` operation and initializes a new account with the deposited amount as the initial balance. If the request is a `WITHDRAW`, then the associated transaction is aborted. 

### Waiting for Older Transactions 
Certain conflicting operations from newer transactions may need to wait for older transactions to either be committed or aborted before being able to proceed. Each server maintains a notification list for each transaction that the entire system encounters. Each server maintains a task (also known as a green thread) for each client it is connected to. We also maintain a task for each request issued from another server in the system. These requests are from coordinators forwarding a client request to other servers when the coordinator server does not own the object referenced in the request. We can block any task whenver it issues a conflicting operation that needs to wait for another transaction to complete without blocking the entire system. Whenever a task needs to block, it will subscribe to the notification list of the transaction it must wait for. When any transaction commits or aborts, the server will notify all other tasks with blocked conflicting operations that are subscribed to the notification list associated with the transaction. The blocked tasks can then re-attempt the conflicting operation. This notification list approach is similar to conditional variables in system programming.

### Local Locks
Our system uses a lock for each account and a lock on the map storing all accounts to prevent concurrency bugs in our implementation of the timestamped ordering rules since we have many concurrent tasks attempting to access the map of all objects on a server and each object itself. However, our approach differs in that locks are only held for short amounts of time – just enough to apply a read or write rule for a transaction's operation on an object. The system will NOT hold locks while waiting for other transactions to complete. The read and write rules are simple checks that will potentially update an underlying data structure. No task will hold a lock for large amounts of time while waiting for another transaction to complete, so the system will never encounter a deadlock despite using locks. 

### Handling Timestamp Ordering Conflicts
Whenever an older transaction attemps to read or write an object that has been committed to by a newer transaction, the server servicing the request will notify the coordinator (or the coordinator itself was attempting to service the request and will notify itself) and the coordinator will abort the transaction. Whenever a server encounters a request for an object that does not exist, it will notify the coordinator (or again the coordinator will notify itself) and the coordinator will abort the transaction. Likewise for withdraw requests or read requests to non-existent objects. 

### Handling Aborts
On an abort, the coordinator will notify all other servers to abort the aborted transaction. The server will then notify each object to abort the transaction. Each object will purge any tentative writes from its queue of tentative writes. Then the server will send a notification to all tasks subscribed to the transaction's notification list, as described above. 

### Avoiding Partial Writes & Stale Data
Since our system represents `DEPOSIT` and `WITHDRAW` operations as a read followed by a write with the new balance, concurrent `DEPOSIT` and `WITHDRAW` will never use stale data. Older transactions attepting to write to some object will be aborted in the case that newer transactions commited that object sooner by the timestamped-ordering read and write rules. Newer transactions attempting to perform the initial read of a `DEPOSIT` or `WITHDRAW` will be forced to wait for older transactions to resolve (commit or abort) before performing the write operation. If two transactions interleave operations upon two or more concurrent `DEPOSIT` or `WITHDRAW` requests – that is perform the reads one after another before performing the writes one after another, timestamped-ordering rules again prevent writes from using incorrect data. Consider both of the following interleaving of operations when an older transaction `T1` performs a `DEPOSIT` or `WITHDRAW` at the same time that a newer transaction `T2` performs a  `DEPOSIT` or `WITHDRAW`:
```
 Variation 1 | Variation 2 | Variation 3 | Variation 4
   T1 read   |   T1 read   |   T2 read   |   T2 read
   T2 read   |   T2 read   |   T1 read   |   T1 read
  T1 write   |  T2 write   |  T1 write   |  T2 write
  T2 write   |  T1 write   |  T2 write   |  T1 write
```
In all cases, since T2 reads before T1 writes (i.e. the `DEPOSIT`/`WITHDRAW` operation is NOT atomic), the timestamped ordering rules will abort T1 when T1 attempts to perform the write operation. 

In the case that a `DEPOSIT` or `WITHDRAW` is atomic (i.e. the read and write operations immediately follow each other and there is no interleaving across transactions), then either the older transacton `T1` performed the read and write first or the newer transaction `T2` performed the read and write first. If `T1` executes these operations first, then `T2` will block when it attempts to execute the initial read until `T1` resolves (aborts or commits). If `T2` executes these operations first, then `T1` will be aborted when it attempts to execute the initial read by the same reasoning as above – this will be a violation of the timestamped ordering rules. 

### Handling Commits
When a client issues a request to commit its transaction, the coordinator that is servicing the client will ask all other servers to begin a consistency check. Each server will perform a consistency check on each object it owns and notify the coordinator if whether all consistency checks passed or if any consistency check failed. If any consistency check on any server fails, the coordinator will issue an abort command to all servers and the system will proceed with the abort protocol described above. If all consistency checks at all servers pass, then the coordinator will issue another request to commit the transaction. Each server will direct each object to commit the value in the tentative write associated with the committing transaction (if such a write exists). Each object will update the value and committed timestamp of the object and remove the tentative write from the object's ordered map. The coordinator will go ahead and notify the client that the commit succeeded once it received the result of the consistency checks from all servers. The coordinator will notify the client that a commit failed once it receives just one response from a server indicating the consistency check failed. 

### Committing Newer Transactions
When a server is performing the consistency check and the transaction attempting to commit must wait for another transaction to commit if an older transaction also performed a tentative write without committing, the server will use the same notification list subscription technique described above to wait for the older transaction to complete before performing the consistency check on each object. 